# ESCT: Part 11 - Authentication (Draft)

## Introduction

> ### 🛠 <span style="color:goldenrod;">MODULE UNDER CONSTRUCTION - Please move to next module</span>

Authentication is the process of establishing that an entity, whether person or machine, is who they say they are. In this process the entity starts by "knocking on the door", perhaps even announcing themselves and showing their id card when prompted. Identification(id) cards usually contain a photograph, name, description, and other personal information.  Id cards are usually issued by a trusted organization.  

Then, someone or something compares the information on the id card with the entity as they currently appear to be in realtime, as they have announced themselves.  One of two things follow: 

- The information on the card, matches verbal announcement, and matches the entity as it has presented itself in that moment.  Authentication is successful and completed.  Further communication and access can proceed. 

- Something between the information on the card, what was said in the verbal announcement, and the entity in that moment doesn't match.  Imagine you get a knock on your door, you ask who it is, and the person on the other side says you have a package delivery.  In fact, you're not expecting a package and when you look through the peek hole, the person is not wearing a uniform and doesn't have a package in their hands.  Something doesn't match.  They don't seem to be who they say they are.  Authentication fails and other that notifying the entity of the failure, no further communication proceeds and certainly no access is granted. 

Authentication is the mechanism that helps guard the front door of an application.  It's the mechanism that helps control the outer rim. In the context of cyberspace, in the most simple implementations, this usually means a username and a password but a variety of credentials can be used.

In this module, we will covers some of the related concepts that can be confused with authentication, but that interact with it to secure a system or application as well as some of the different ways authentication can be implemented.

## Table of Contents

* [Confusion with Authorization and Access](#confusion-with-authorization-and-access)
* [Multi-factor Authentication](#multi-factor-authentication)
* [Token-Based Implementations](#token-based-implementation)
* [Sessions](#sessions)
* [Authentication and Security Concerns](#authentication-and-security-concerns)
* [Prevention and Countermeasures](#prevention-and-countermeasures)
* [Quiz](#quiz)

## Confusion with Authorization and Access

### Description

Thinking back to the example above, authentication is required for access beyond being on the property and standing on the doorstep.  Once an entity has been authenticated, then they are granted access. Access immediately follows Authentication, but how much access an entity is allowed and the actions they are permitted to, is authorized, to perform are governed by a set of permissions or access controls referred to as Authorization.  

Authorization can be addressed based on a set of credentials.  Depending on the application, credentials can consist of a username and password pair,  or may included other things like tokens, which will be covered, later in this module.  Credentials are what entities use to for access but are also presented as part of the authentication process.  A little confusing, right?

When implemented in an application/system, this often appears to happen in a single step. You login and if you get a successful response you get access to the application.

Multiple concepts that are very closely related.  One of the concepts we'll discuss later, OAuth, originally designed for authorization, has evolved into providing 
authentication as well (not intended).  Authorization and Access are very similar concepts and are implemented together, sometimes within the Authorization mechanism.

Another related concept is session management.  Depending on the architecture of the system or application, once an entity is authenticated, subsequent activity/interactions need to be tracked/attributed to the same entity.  This functions like a hand stamp for re-entry to an event or amusement park accept it is unique to you. 

Authorization, Identity, Credentials, Access, Access Controls, Permissions, Session and Session Management are all terms you will come across when implementing Authentication in applications.  While each has distinct definitions, consider them as mutually interactive contributors/participants in an integrated system that works to allow into an application only what is verified and trusted, tracks and monitors the activity of what's been allowed in, and ensures what does get in, only has access to what they absolutely need in order to perform their specific function.  How these are implemented and their specific configuration/arrangement is unique to the design of each application. 

## Multi-factor Authentication

### Description

Multi-factor Authentication (MFA) is a way of implementing authentication so that more than one aspect of an entity is checked when it presents itself. from the initial simple example, checking both the information on the id card (something they have) and asking the entity to verbally state their name (something they know), for instance. 

When implemented in applications, these aspects are referred to as factors and Authentication can be implemented using one of these factors (single-factor) or 2 or more (multi-factor):

Something you know/that is in your brain - Password
Something you have/possess/have physical or digital access to - Code generated by outside party; key
Something you are/something unique to you as a person - fingerprint, facial recognition, other biometrics, palm scan, retinal scan

Authentication mechanism can be simple or complex.  Security industry best practices recommend implementing multi-factor authentication wherever possible.

## Token-based Implementation

### Description

Tokens are ... long strings of random characters used to identify an entity, session, as a badge for access.  Used for authentication, used for session management, provided by authorization servers. 

Generate token, assign token to user, check token validity, expire token.


Common implementations include OAuth: 

Open Authorization(OAuth) is a protocol in which a multi-step arrangement generates a token for a specific users, the user presents as a credential in lieu of a password.  Client-server model, there is an extra server (authorization/token generating service or server) that after a user authenticates with it, it generateds a token, and brokers authentication/authorization between initial entity and a resource.

Originally built for authorization, as it's name suggests, it has evolved for use in the authentication and authorization mechanisms.  A very good resource that describes the OAuth in context of it's history and current implementations is here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=996OiexHze0

JSON Web Tokens (abbreviated JWT, pronounced "jot")
Multi-use tokens for authentication and session.  
Three components, header contains information identifying type of token and algorithm used for the signature, payload/body that contains data about the disposition of the token, signature - which serves as an integrity check to establish if the token has been modified or tampered with. 

Base64 encoded and cryptographically signed

Tokens, like other authentication credentials, etc. must be protected in transit and at rest. 

Why use JWT? For post authentication authorization Can be signed and encrypted -> trust; low overhead; Integrity of information being transmited and non-repudiation; JWT checkers validate token; token belongs to user

Expiration /Refresh

Why use OAuth? when Users need access to third party services, outside of your environment where you don't want to share your credentials with those third parties.  In OAuth protocol/architecture, an authorization service brokers access and grants users an access token to present, in place of credentials. 


### <span style="color:blue;">Example</span> / <span style="color:red;">Quiz</span>

Create/Generate Token
```


```




Validate Token
```
def connect(%{"authorize" => token}, socket, _connect_info) do  //
  case JwtChecker.validate_token(token)do
  ...
  ...
```

https://dev.to/onpointvn/implement-jwt-authentication-with-phoenix-token-n58
(https://hexdocs.pm/guardian/Guardian.Token.Jwt.html)

https://elixirschool.com/blog/jwt-auth-with-joken/



### <span style="color:blue;">Example</span> / <span style="color:red;">Quiz</span>

Oauth simple

User Authenticated into Application/Service X
Application/Service X prompts user if they want to login using social media account credentials
User Logs into social media account/other service
Authorization Server/Service Generates Access Token 
Service X sends Token for limited access to Social Media Account (instead of sharing credentials)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=996OiexHze0

Three primary entities, requesting, service one, service 2, intermediary server that handles issuing tokens that get presented in lieu of credentials

``` 
[OAuth2.Client module ](https://hexdocs.pm/oauth2/OAuth2.Client.html)

```

## Sessions

### Description

Authentication is the first step a user must complete to access a secure application/data.  For an application, that means something must be sent from 
user->application authentication mechanism
and from
application authentication mechanism-> user - 

Once an entity is authenticated, subsequent activity/interactions need to be tracked/attributed to the same entity.  This is done by 
establishing and manage a Session. This allows a user, once authenticated to have access to the application without having to show their credentials every time they want to perform an action.

Sessions save and keep updated the state of a user while the use an application.  Opening time and closing time at a museum.  A ticket and/or stamp gets you in and you can come and go in areas allowed by public/membership, but once the museum closes, you have to leave and come back another day.  If you have a membership or ticket for multiple visits, you have to show your card/ticket at the door again.

Sessions do something similar this for applications.  Depending on the application, however, they may be 

Session and Sessionless 

Session is being able to come and go so long as you're carrying your membership card. 

Session-less ... fire and forget purchasing a single day pass for the museam.  You don't get a membership card with your name, and if you're paying cash, probably can't track you individually.


## Authentication and Security Concerns

An application's authentication mechanism is a critical component.  If not securely designed, it can provide an attack vector for malicious actors to gain access to legitimate user accounts, privileged application features, and 

Authentication, credentials, should never be stored in cleartext, hardcoded in code base, 
Credential Stuffing Attacks
Security concerns/examples of multi-factor authentication getting hacked
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) fatigue attack - aka MFA Bombing - aka MFA Spamming
Bypassing MFA
JWT token vulnerabilities

Authentication Issues, Weaknesses, Failures make an appearance on multiple lists
OWASP Top 10 for Web Applications A07:2021-Identification and Authentication Failurs (used to be called Broken Authenticication

## Prevention and Countermeasures
Use built and tested authentication mechanisms in your code language framework.  Due to the complexity, it is 

## Quiz
Authentication is a key component of an application but given its integration with some of the other concepts mentioned in this module, it's implementation in your products can become complex. This module touched on some of the highlights but please refer to the references below for extensive explanations of authentication and related. 

### <span style="color:blue;">Example</span> / <span style="color:red;">Quiz</span>


```
Which of the following OWASP Top 10 Web Application Security Risks are related to the abuse of credentials or flaws in mult-factor authentication implementation?
1)A02:2021-Cryptographic Failures
2)A05:2021-Security Misconfiguration
3)A07:2021-Identification and Authentication Failures
4)A08:2017-Insecure Deserialization

```

```
Which two are examples of a credential that can be used in an application's authentication process?
1)token
2)api call
3)session
4)username and password

```
```
Which statement best characterizes how an entity trying to be properly authenticated goes about it?
1)Hello, I just came from X street and would like to enter your establishment. I am who I say I am and I can show you proof.  May I enter?
2)Let me in, now! Let me in , now! Let me in, now!!!!! 
3)Trust me, I'm harmless
4)Yes, I know that id doesn't look like me but my friend said I can use it so it's ok

```

### References
https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Authentication_Cheat_Sheet.html
https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html
https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/stable/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/06-Session_Management_Testing/README
https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Credential_stuffing
https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/latest/4-Web_Application_Security_Testing/06-Session_Management_Testing/10-Testing_JSON_Web_Tokens

[**<- Previous Module: Secure SDLC Concepts**](./3-ssdlc.livemd) || [**Next Module: Elixir Security ->**](./5-elixir.livemd)
